Receive: Tenants' external labels proposal (#5720)
thanos-io/thanos: docs/proposals-accepted/202209-receive-tenant-external-labels.md

---
type: proposal
title: Allow specifying tenant-specific external labels in Receivers
status: accepted
owner: haanhvu
menu: proposals-accepted
---

## 1 Related links/tickets

* https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/5434

## 2 What problem(s) are we trying to solve?

We want to add arbitrary external labels to each tenant in Thanos Receiver.

## 3 How is it going to be helpful?

This new functionality is helpful in many use cases. Two typical ones are:
* Compact tenant blocks based on tenants’ external labels

> * Query data from tenants which share the same external labels

Reviewer: Does the existing `tenant_id` work in this case? I understand the second query usecase as users may want to have some cross-tenants aggregation queries or query tenants with some other labels like `region`.

For the first usecase, when do we want to compact based on other external labels? I think we should always compact using `tenant_id`, right?

Author: If you do some query based on some other external label, and you know that you'll do that query a lot, would compact based on that external label make your query faster? That's my understanding.

Reviewer: Compact blocks means merging blocks together to a single block. Each tenant's blocks should only merge with their own blocks. I don't think it is correct to merge blocks across tenants.
I think what you want is to have some kind of secondary index to group some tenants blocks together? That's just logical grouping, right? Not compaction.

Reviewer 2: The querier can filter out stores which do not match certain external labels, so maybe we need to rephrase this to say:
* Reduce fanout when querying data from tenants which share certain external labels

## 4 Pitfalls of the current solution

> Currently, we can only add external labels to Receivers. Each tenant in a Receiver only gets one external label, which is the tenant ID. This is not flexible enough to do complex compact and query works at the tenant level.

Reviewer 3: We cannot partition tenant tsdb blocks yet, but this change would enable that.

Author: @fpetkovski If we don't persist tenant's external labels in TSDB, can we still partition tenant TSDB blocks?

Reviewer: I am a little bit confused. The partition is to partition each TSDB block?

Author: The word "partition" might lead us to thinking of storage partitioning. So I decided to use "select" instead.

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can add a Goals/Non-goals here?

> ## 5 What are the possible solution approaches?

Reviewer 3: Subsection "How"?

We’re seeing two solution approaches:

> * Specify the tenants for each external label in Receiver: Since we already have the functionality of adding external labels to Receiver, is there a way to specify which tenants each external label goes to? Because many tenants may share the same external labels, this may be a straightforward way for users.

Reviewer 3: Maybe if you have questions, you can organize them in an open questions section below?
Right now it feels like this is actual solution to the problem, and an "answer" rather than a question 🙂

Author: Yeah that's not a question anymore. I answered it myself after reading the code :D

> * Add external labels to each tenant directly: This way, we treat each tenant independently, which seems to be a more straightforward way in implementation. If goinf this way, we can start with the tenant configuration file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Add external labels to each tenant directly: This way, we treat each tenant independently, which seems to be a more straightforward way in implementation. If going this way, we can start with the tenant configuration file.
```
Maybe linking documentation regarding tenant configuration file and showing how you want to add a new field to this file might be better? This would give reader a much better idea of the changes that you're proposing.

## 6 Which solution approach is the most favorable?

After discussing internally in the issue team (@fpetkovski, @saswatamcode, @haanhvu), we agree the second approach may be the better one to start with since it’s more straightforward in implementation.

## 7 Potential challenges of the favorable approach?

We’re seeing two main challenges:

> * Support external labels for decoupled routers and ingesters: Receive routers and ingestors are decoupled functionally, but currently they are not decoupled in code. Issue [#5643](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/5643) has already been raised for this. With routers and ingestors intermingled in code, we need to find a way to support external labels for RouterOnly and IngestorOnly. One apparent way is to fix [#5643](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/5643) at least partially enough before tackling this challenge.

Reviewer 3: Maybe this could be distributed within "Goals" or "Pitfalls"?

---
type: proposal
title: Allow specifying tenant-specific external labels in Receivers
status: accepted
owner: haanhvu
menu: proposals-accepted
---

## 1 Related links/tickets

https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/5434

## 2 Why

We would like to select and query tenant blocks from Receivers in an arbitrary manner.

## 3 Pitfalls of the current solution

Currently, we can only add external labels to Receiver itself, not to each tenant in the Receiver. There’s currently no way to select and query tenant blocks in an arbitrary manner.

## 4 Goals

* Allow users to add arbitrary tenants’ external labels in the easiest way possible
* Allow users to change arbitrary tenants’ external labels in the easiest way possible
* Changes in tenants’ external labels are handled correctly
* Backward compatibility (e.g., with Receiver’s external labels) is assured
* Tenants’ external labels are handled separately in RouterIngestor, RouterOnly, and IngestorOnly modes

## 5 Non-goals

> * Logically split RouterOnly and IngestorOnly modes (Issue [#5643](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/5643)): If RouterOnly and IngestorOnly modes are logically split, implementing tenants’ external labels in RouterOnly and IngestorOnly modes would be less challenging. However, the split could be tricky and time-consuming, which might distract us from implementing tenants’ external labels. So we will not do it now.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Logically split RouterOnly and IngestorOnly modes (Issue [#5643](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/5643)): If RouterOnly and IngestorOnly modes are logically split, implementing tenants’ external labels in RouterOnly and IngestorOnly modes would be less challenging. However, this needs more in-depth investigation and will be tackled as a separate issue.
```

## 6 Audience

> Users who need to have cross-tenant information and do cross-tenant activities

Reviewer 3: This isn't really cross-tenancy. Maybe something like this would be better?
```suggestion
Users who are admin personas and need to perform admin operations on Thanos for multiple tenants
```

## 7 How

We’ll add a new `external_labels` field in the hasring config. Something like this:
 ```
 [
    {
        "hashring": "tenant-a",
        "endpoints": ["tenant-a-1.metrics.local:19291/api/v1/receive", "tenant-a-2.metrics.local:19291/api/v1/receive"],
        "tenants": ["tenant-a"]

>         "external_labels": ["label-1", "label-2", "label-3"]

Author: @fpetkovski @saswatamcode here should it be `"external_labels": ["label-name-1:label-value-1", "label-name-2:label-value-2", "label-name-3:label-value-3"]`? 🤔

Reviewer 3: I think it can be similar to how we pass in label key-value pairs via flag like `--label='receive_replica="0"'`.
So it would be something like `external_labels": ["label=value", "label2=value2"]`.

Reviewer 3: Yes, so I think you can reuse `parseFlagLabels` https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/main/cmd/thanos/rule.go#L747 to basically parse string slice from YAML.

Author: @saswatamcode Is the quote surrounding the label value important?

Reviewer: So `"external_labels": ["label-1", "label-2", "label-3"]` is specifying the label name value pairs? or just label names?

    },
 ]
 ```
In [MultiTSDB](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/4ce3fe19ebb39a308769fb2a9492295b1f113701/pkg/receive/multitsdb.go#L46), each tenant’s external labels will be mapped to its tenant ID.
Each tenant’s external labels will also be extended to the [list of labels](https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/blob/4ce3fe19ebb39a308769fb2a9492295b1f113701/pkg/store/labelpb/label.go#L282) when the tenant’s TSDB instance is created.
Tenants’ external labels will be first implemented in RouterIngestor, since this is the main mode.

> Once tenants’ external labels are implemented in RouterIngestor, we’ll handle changes in tenants’ external labels. So that when users change the values of `external_labels` field in the hasring config, the changes will appear on users’ query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once tenants’ external labels are implemented in RouterIngestor, we will handle changes in tenants’ external labels. So that when users change the values of `external_labels` field in the hashring config, the changes will appear on users’ query.
```

Finally, we will implement tenants’ external labels in RouterOnly and IngestorOnly modes.
For the tests, the foremost ones are testing backward compatibility (e.g., with Receiver’s external labels), defining one or multiple tenants’ external labels correctly, handling changes in tenants’ external labels correctly, and shipper detecting and uploading tenants’ external labels correctly to block storage. We may add more tests in the future but currently these are the most important ones to do first.

## 8 Implementation plan

* Add a new `external_labels` field in the hasring config
* Map tenant ID to tenant’s external labels
* Extend tenant’s external labels to the list of labels when the tenant’s TSDB instance is created
* Implement tenants’ external labels in RouterIngestor
* Handle changes for tenant’s external labels
* Implement tenants’ external labels in RouterOnly

> *Implement tenants’ external labels in IngestorOnly

Reviewer: Nit, we need one space here
